WI #617: Proposal for data included in a FOCUS dataset (#838)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/column_naming_and_ordering.md

# Column Handling

> A [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) consists of a set of columns that convey information about the charges incurred with a provider. Each column describes an aspect of the charge, including but not limited to:

Reviewer: Per @rileyjenk:
```suggestion
A [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) consists of a set of columns that convey information about the cost and usage incurred with a provider. Each column describes an aspect of the charge, including but not limited to:
```

Reviewer: Discussed further in TF1 Mar 25.  Decided to leave as charge, and need to discuss the term for a row in a FOCUS dataset (row, line item, charge, charge record, something else).

* Who is responsible for incurring or delivering the service.
* What the charge is for.
* When the charge was incurred.
* Where the service was delivered.
* Why the charge was incurred for a specific price.
* How much the charge is and how that cost is calculated.

While FOCUS establishes the core structure and standardizes columns for consistent reporting of cost and usage data, the diverse and evolving landscape of providers and service offerings may require providers and data generators to include supplemental columns in the FOCUS dataset. These additional columns may enable deeper analysis and provide more detailed descriptions of usage that may not be fully captured by standard FOCUS dataset columns.

> In such cases, providers and data generators are responsible for ensuring that their usage and cost data is accurately and comprehensively represented by including necessary supplemental columns without duplicating data in FOCUS columns. Rows in a FOCUS dataset may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to align with FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), while enriching the dataset, providers and data generators must maintain the integrity of FOCUS-defined dimensions and metrics. Providers and data generators must ensure the accuracy of all dimensions and metrics, particularly summable values such as costs and quantities, when performing these transformations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In such cases, providers and data generators are responsible for ensuring that their usage and cost data is accurately and comprehensively represented by including necessary supplemental columns without duplicating data in FOCUS columns. Rows in a FOCUS dataset may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to align with FOCUS requirements (e.g. Discount Handling), while enriching the dataset, providers and data generators must maintain the integrity of FOCUS-defined dimensions and metrics. When performing these transformations, providers and data generators must ensure the accuracy of all dimensions and metrics, particularly summable values such as costs and quantities.
```

Reviewer: Agree with @jpickardgreen's suggestion, which I edited to add back the comma after e.g.

> Columns within FOCUS include an ID and a display name. Column IDs are used in files and database tables and display names can be used in report output and other descriptive content, like documentation. Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* follow consistent naming and ordering conventions to reduce friction for FinOps practitioners who consume the data for analysis, reporting, and other use cases.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to mention the 'reducing friction for FinOps practitioners piece? Could we change it to ' Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow consistent naming and ordering conventions in order to streamline the ingestion of data for analysis, reporting and other use case.

All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and ordering requirements listed below.

## Attribute ID

ColumnHandling

## Attribute Name

Column Handling

## Description

Naming and ordering convention for columns appearing in a *FOCUS dataset*.

## Requirements

### Column Names

* All columns defined by FOCUS MUST follow the following rules:
  * Column IDs MUST use [Pascal case](#glossary:pascalcase).
  * Column IDs MUST NOT use abbreviations.
  * Column IDs MUST be alphanumeric with no special characters.
  * Column IDs SHOULD NOT use acronyms.
  * Column IDs SHOULD NOT exceed 50 characters to accommodate column length restrictions of various data repositories.
  * Columns that have an ID and a Name MUST have the `Id` or `Name` suffix in the Column ID.
  * Column display names MAY avoid the `Name` suffix if there are no other columns with the same name prefix.
  * Columns with the `Category` suffix MUST be normalized.

> * Custom (e.g., provider-defined) columns that are not defined by FOCUS but included in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow the following rules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Custom (e.g. provider-defined) columns that are not defined by FOCUS but included in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow the following rules:
```

Reviewer: Commas belong after e.g. (see [here](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/16172/should-i-always-use-a-comma-after-e-g-or-i-e) for more).  Resolving.

# Column Handling

A [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) consists of a set of columns that convey information about the charges incurred with a provider. Each column describes an aspect of the charge, including but not limited to:

* Who is responsible for incurring or delivering the service.
* What the charge is for.
* When the charge was incurred.
* Where the service was delivered.
* Why the charge was incurred for a specific price.
* How much the charge is and how that cost is calculated.

> Given the broad range of ever-evolving providers and service offerings, FOCUS as a specification may not define all the columns needed to comprehensively describe every provider's unique cost and usage charges. Providers and data generators are responsible for including additional information required to *accurately* and *completely* describe the charges included within a *FOCUS dataset*. Rows in a *FOCUS dataset* may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to meet the requirements defined by FOCUS columns and attributes (e.g., [Discount Handling](#discounthandling)). Data generators are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of dimensions and metrics when aggregating or splitting rows, especially summable metrics like costs and quantities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While FOCUS establishes the core structure and standardizes columns for consistent reporting of cost and usage data, the diverse and evolving landscape of providers and service offerings may require providers and data generators to include supplemental columns in the FOCUS dataset. These additional columns may enable deeper analysis and provide more detailed descriptions of usage that may not be fully captured by standard FOCUS dataset columns.
In such cases, providers and data generators are responsible for ensuring that their usage and cost data is accurately and comprehensively represented by including necessary supplemental columns without duplicating data in FOCUS columns. Rows in a FOCUS dataset may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to align with FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), while enriching the dataset, providers and data generators must maintain the integrity of FOCUS-defined dimensions and metrics. Providers and data generators must ensure the accuracy of all dimensions and metrics, particularly summable values such as costs and quantities, when performing these transformations.
Additionally, any extra columns added by providers and data generators should be optional for consumers, allowing them to include only the additional data they specifically need.
```

Columns within FOCUS include an ID and a display name. Column IDs are used in files and database tables and display names can be used in report output and other descriptive content, like documentation. Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* follow consistent naming and ordering conventions to reduce friction for FinOps practitioners who consume the data for analysis, reporting, and other use cases.

All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and ordering requirements listed below.

## Attribute ID

ColumnHandling

## Attribute Name

Column Handling

## Description

Naming, ordering, and inclusion criteria for columns appearing in a *FOCUS dataset*.

## Requirements

> ### Column Inclusion

Author: This section is the primary purpose of the PR. All other changes are purely editorial cleanup that happened as we discussed where and how to add this requirement..

Author: Removed for 1.2. Will re-evaluate later.

When the provider publishes a non-FOCUS cost and usage dataset, the following applies:

> * Custom columns MUST be included for all information not covered by FOCUS columns that exists in the latest version of non-FOCUS cost and usage datasets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Custom columns MUST be available for export in a FOCUS Dataset export for all information not covered by FOCUS columns.
```

Author: People are pushing back on making selection a requirement. Let's keep that as a separate requirement for now. I'm personally fine with MUST or SHOULD, but let's keep it separate either way. I'll propose that change for you.

Author: Resolving this since I added a separate suggestion to make selection a SHOULD. If anyone feels strongly for or against that (or making a MUST), please comment on the next line.

> 

Author: Adding this for clarity based on the discussion in the maintainer meeting...
```suggestion
* Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.
```

> * Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

Reviewer: I believe these two lines form the crux of the quasi-philosophical conversation the working group needs to have on this PR.  A couple points to consider:

- Shall we _require_ providers to put all of their non-FOCUS columns into a FOCUS dataset?
- Shall FOCUS _require_ providers to allow practitioners to select a subset of columns in a FOCUS dataset?

My personal opinion is that either A) both lines be MUST, or B) both lines be SHOULD.  Forcing a practitioner to consume every column under the sun without giving them a way to filter down the list isn't very kind of us.

Further, we must decide whether this section shall be A) "north star" requirements that many providers likely will not meet (at least at first), or B) weaker requirements that will not implicitly encourage providers to "level up" and meet.  On this point, I am more ambivalent.

Reviewer 3: My opinion is that columns should be available to be selected by practitioners during the export process or during import process. Including every available column by default would impact dataset sizes rather significantly. It would also have the potential to increase the cost of 3rd party tools and increase complexity and cost of home-grown tools. It could also create an environment where providers don't need to do the hard yards to become more FOCUS orientated (compliant) and instead opt to just include all their data in their custom columns.

Reviewer 4: Putting myself in the practitioner shoes, I'd love it to be A(Must). Putting myself in the vendor shoes, I'd love it to be B(Should). 

If I want to to drive adoption and compliance of the standard, that also seems to gravitate towards B.

Author: +1 to @gparker-at-sf. But as a reminder, we're building the spec for practitioners to get what they need.

> * Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

Author: Based on Graham's suggestion and the conversation in TF1, proposing making this a strong suggestion but not a requirement since it's a big functional change which also has some hidden requirements. This gives us room to make it required in the future.
```suggestion
* Data generators SHOULD allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.
```

> * Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

Author: Adding missing space
```suggestion
* Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

```

Columns within FOCUS include an ID and a display name. Column IDs are used in files and database tables and display names can be used in report output and other descriptive content, like documentation. Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* follow consistent naming and ordering conventions to reduce friction for FinOps practitioners who consume the data for analysis, reporting, and other use cases.

All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and ordering requirements listed below.

## Attribute ID

ColumnHandling

## Attribute Name

Column Handling

## Description

Naming, ordering, and inclusion criteria for columns appearing in a *FOCUS dataset*.

## Requirements

### Column Inclusion

When the provider publishes a non-FOCUS cost and usage dataset, the following applies:

* Custom columns MUST be included for all information not covered by FOCUS columns that exists in the latest version of non-FOCUS cost and usage datasets.
* Data generators MAY allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

> 

Author: As discussed in the TF1 call on Mar 18, I'm proposing we add a statement about conformance. Given all the conversation around MUSTs and SHOULDs around inclusion of columns, this would give data generators a clear way to convey what is and isn't supported so practitioners will know how to handle each case. I'm making it a SHOULD since we're not providing guidance for how to add conformance documentation. I do believe it should be a MUST in 1.3.
```suggestion
* Data generators SHOULD provide conformance documentation that indicates whether the *FOCUS dataset* fully, partially, or does not conform to each requirement.
  * Data generators SHOULD include an explanation of what does not conform when a requirement is not fully conformant so practitioners will know they need to handle the difference.

```

Author: Resolving this since we decided to remove the column inclusion requirement for 1.2

# Column Handling

A [*FOCUS dataset*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset) consists of a set of columns that convey information about the charges incurred with a provider. Each column describes an aspect of the charge, including but not limited to:

* Who is responsible for incurring or delivering the service.
* What the charge is for.
* When the charge was incurred.
* Where the service was delivered.
* Why the charge was incurred for a specific price.
* How much the charge is and how that cost is calculated.

While FOCUS establishes the core structure and standardizes columns for consistent reporting of cost and usage data, the diverse and evolving landscape of providers and service offerings may require providers and data generators to include supplemental columns in the FOCUS dataset. These additional columns may enable deeper analysis and provide more detailed descriptions of usage that may not be fully captured by standard FOCUS dataset columns.

> In such cases, providers and data generators are responsible for ensuring that their usage and cost data is accurately and comprehensively represented by including necessary supplemental columns without duplicating data in FOCUS columns. Rows in a FOCUS dataset may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to align with FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), while enriching the dataset, providers and data generators must maintain the integrity of FOCUS-defined dimensions and metrics. Providers and data generators must ensure the accuracy of all dimensions and metrics, particularly summable values such as costs and quantities, when performing these transformations.
> 

Author: ```suggestion

In such cases, providers and data generators are responsible for ensuring that their usage and cost data is accurately and comprehensively represented by including necessary supplemental columns without duplicating data in FOCUS columns. Rows in a FOCUS dataset may be aggregated or split differently than non-FOCUS datasets to align with FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), while enriching the dataset, providers and data generators must maintain the integrity of FOCUS-defined dimensions and metrics. Providers and data generators must ensure the accuracy of all dimensions and metrics, particularly summable values such as costs and quantities, when performing these transformations.
```

Columns within FOCUS include an ID and a display name. Column IDs are used in files and database tables and display names can be used in report output and other descriptive content, like documentation. Column IDs provided in a *FOCUS dataset* follow consistent naming and ordering conventions to reduce friction for FinOps practitioners who consume the data for analysis, reporting, and other use cases.

All columns defined in the FOCUS specification MUST follow the naming and ordering requirements listed below.

## Attribute ID

ColumnHandling

## Attribute Name

Column Handling

## Description

> Naming, ordering, and inclusion criteria for columns appearing in a *FOCUS dataset*.

Author: ```suggestion
Naming and ordering convention for columns appearing in a *FOCUS dataset*.
```

## Requirements

### Column Inclusion

When the provider publishes a non-FOCUS cost and usage dataset, the following applies:

> * Custom columns MUST be included for all information not covered by FOCUS columns that exists in the latest version of non-FOCUS cost and usage datasets.
> * Data generators SHOULD allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

Reviewer: @flanakin 
As discussed in the Thu Mar 20 SteerCo and Mon Mar 24 Maintainer meetings, this PR does not appear to have a path forward with these two lines included in any normative variant.  Please remove these lines, and we can discuss the content of the rest possibly moving forward in TF1 tomorrow.
```suggestion
```

> ### Column Inclusion
> 
> When the provider publishes a non-FOCUS cost and usage dataset, the following applies:
> 
> * Custom columns MUST be included for all information not covered by FOCUS columns that exists in the latest version of non-FOCUS cost and usage datasets.
> * Data generators SHOULD allow practitioners to select a subset of FOCUS or custom columns.

Reviewer: @flanakin 
As discussed in the Thu Mar 20 SteerCo and Mon Mar 24 Maintainer meetings, this PR does not appear to have a path forward with these two lines included in any normative variant.  Please remove these lines, and we can discuss the content of the rest possibly moving forward in TF1 tomorrow.
```suggestion
```

  * Column IDs MUST use [Pascal case](#glossary:pascalcase).
  * Column IDs MUST NOT use abbreviations.
  * Column IDs MUST be alphanumeric with no special characters.
  * Column IDs SHOULD NOT use acronyms.
  * Column IDs SHOULD NOT exceed 50 characters to accommodate column length restrictions of various data repositories.
  * Columns that have an ID and a Name MUST have the `Id` or `Name` suffix in the Column ID.
  * Column display names MAY avoid the `Name` suffix if there are no other columns with the same name prefix.
  * Columns with the `Category` suffix MUST be normalized.
* Custom (e.g., provider-defined) columns that are not defined by FOCUS but included in a *FOCUS dataset* MUST follow the following rules:
  * Custom columns MUST be prefixed with a consistent `x_` prefix to identify them as external, custom columns and distinguish them from FOCUS columns to avoid conflicts in future releases.

>   * Custom columns MUST be included for all unique concepts not defined by or that map to FOCUS columns when the provider publishes a non-FOCUS cost and usage dataset.

Reviewer 5: Custom columns should not be MUST but SHOULD provided to avoid the implementation of the spec from being diluted/larger than it should for the intended audience.

For example should this include all sub resource information (e.g. Kubernetes pod level costs as well?). This is why we have chosen to have a standard and a detailed billing export -- not everyone wants everything in one export. Additionally this also increases costs for customers to manage and store this data that we should be mindful of.

Reviewer 6: Is this the latest version of the diff? I thought this clause had been deferred for later discussions.

Reviewer 7: @aws-letianfeng you're right - that part is excluded from [the most recent version](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/838/files), i.e., it was deferred for later discussions
